---
layout: post
title: Simple Array
tags: [data-structs]
---

In the octree representation, the chunk is represented by a tree whose root corresponds to the whole chunk and where each child node corresponds to one of the octants of its parent, the idea being that we add child nodes to a node when we need to express more detail or don't have child nodes if all the blocks that correspond to this node are the same. [This picture from Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Octree#/media/File:Octree2.svg) is worth a thousand words. In some implementations the chunk can be the whole world. Octrees are probably only the way to go in very specific situations i.e. if your blocks and operations align in a way that takes advantage of them.

For this article I'll illustrate concepts in terms of quadtrees, the 2D analogue of octrees, for ease of illustration. I'll assume you're a conceptual enough thinker to understand how the same situations can apply in 3D.

### Memory Usage
The memory usage of octrees varies quite a bit by situation. Let's look at some examples of 8x8 chunks in 2d to understand why.

The classic case for an octree is a homogenous chunk. I'll use letters to assign materials and numbers to assign correspoinding nodes.
```
a a a a a a a a
a a a a a a a a
a a a a a a a a
a a a a a a a a
a a a a a a a a
a a a a a a a a
a a a a a a a a
a a a a a a a a
```
In this situation we only need the root node `1` with material `a` to represent the whole chunk.
```
1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1
1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1
1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1
1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1
1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1
1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1
1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1
1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1
```
If we have a quadrant that is a different material `b`, then instead of just having the root node, we need child nodes `1` `2` and `3` with material `a` and child node `4` with material `b`:
```
a a a a a a a a
a a a a a a a a
a a a a a a a a
a a a a a a a a
a a a a b b b b
a a a a b b b b
a a a a b b b b
a a a a b b b b
```
```
1 1 1 1 2 2 2 2
1 1 1 1 2 2 2 2
1 1 1 1 2 2 2 2
1 1 1 1 2 2 2 2
3 3 3 3 4 4 4 4
3 3 3 3 4 4 4 4
3 3 3 3 4 4 4 4
3 3 3 3 4 4 4 4
```
So far so good, the octree representation looks like it represents the chunk pretty efficiently. Let's try a case with a single block of material `b`:
```
a a a a a a a a
a a a a a a a a
a a a a a a a a
a a a a a a a a
a a a a a a a a
a a a a a a a a
a a a a a a a a
a a a a a a a b
```
```
1 1 1 1 2 2 2 2
1 1 1 1 2 2 2 2
1 1 1 1 2 2 2 2
1 1 1 1 2 2 2 2
3 3 3 3 4 4 5 5
3 3 3 3 4 4 5 5
3 3 3 3 6 6 7 8
3 3 3 3 6 6 9 10
```
That didn't go over so well. We have to build the tree all the way down to the lowest level in this case, and if you drew out the tree, you'd find it now has 13 nodes (10 leaf nodes and 3 non-leaf nodes). And if we sprinkle a couple more blocks with material `b` around:
```
b a a a a a a b
a a a a a a a a
a a a a a a a a
a a a a a a a a
a a a a a a a a
a a a a a a a a
a a a a a a a a
b a a a a a a b
```
```
1  2  3  3  4  4  5  6
7  8  3  3  4  4  9  10
11 11 12 12 13 13 14 14
11 11 12 12 13 13 14 14
15 15 16 16 17 17 18 18
15 15 16 16 17 17 18 18
19 20 21 21 22 22 23 24
25 26 21 21 22 22 27 28
```
That went super not well. We had to build the tree out quite a bit to deal with these finer details, and at this point the memory cost is probably comparable to that of the [simple array representation](https://lattice3f.github.io/blog/2017/05/21/simple-array/) when you consider the overhead of pointers and memory allocation data structures. Not to mention that the memory allocations for the nodes have fragmented your memory to kingdom come resulting in cache misses galore.

The short of it is that this representation is great for the large homogenous regions of the world and not great for the regions with fine details. For a game like Minecraft, the sky would be represented very compactly, the detail-heavy surface would be quite heavy, and underground would also be quite heavy considering the scattered deposits of ores.

If you're determined to make it work for you anyway, I'm sure you could come up with some sort of custom object pooling solution, i.e. allocate nodes in large arrays and use them from there for lower allocation structure overhead and fragmentation. Best of luck on your journey!

### Stability
Another thing to point out about the octree representation is that, while the data in the octree is always the same for the same arrangement of blocks in the chunk, it matters very much how you arrange the chunks. Consider our original example:
```
a a a a a a a a
a a a a a a a a
a a a a a a a a
a a a a a a a a
a a a a b b b b
a a a a b b b b
a a a a b b b b
a a a a b b b b
```
```
1 1 1 1 2 2 2 2
1 1 1 1 2 2 2 2
1 1 1 1 2 2 2 2
1 1 1 1 2 2 2 2
3 3 3 3 4 4 4 4
3 3 3 3 4 4 4 4
3 3 3 3 4 4 4 4
3 3 3 3 4 4 4 4
```
If that group of blocks with material `b` didn't align nicely with the octree, e.g. if it were off by a block, the representation wouldn't agree with it so well:
```
a a a a a a a a
a a a a a a a a
a a a a a a a a
a a a a a a a a
a a a b b b b a
a a a b b b b a
a a a b b b b a
a a a b b b b a
```
```
1  1  1  1  2  2  2  2
1  1  1  1  2  2  2  2
1  1  1  1  2  2  2  2
1  1  1  1  2  2  2  2
3  3  4  5  6  6  7  8
3  3  9  10 6  6  11 12
13 13 14 15 16 16 17 18
13 13 19 20 16 16 21 22
```

### Graphics Performance
The nice thing about octrees in terms of graphics is that you can just use the faces of the larger nodes as your faces, i.e. if we have a node with no children, it's all the same material, and we can cover it with faces as if it's one big block. At this level you get face merging for free.

The not nice thing about octrees is that they often to be expanded a fair amount to handle common scenarios and, with that expansion, the number of faces you get from the 'free' merging increases to a fair amount. In addition, it's not as easy to implement face culling or additional face merging as it is with the [simple array representation](https://lattice3f.github.io/blog/2017/05/21/simple-array/).

### CPU Usage
Accessing and updating blocks takes a little more time than with the [simple array representation](https://lattice3f.github.io/blog/2017/05/21/simple-array/) because you need to traverse the tree. The need to traverse the tree also makes it take longer to look up block neighbors (which you might want to do for face culling) or examine chunks slice-wise (which you might want to do for face merging).

### Bulk Updates
If you happen to want to set an octant of a chunk to a particular material, the octree representation will do this for you quickly.

### Level-Of-Detail
The octree representation is among the most conducive to producing meshes that are close enough to the actual mesh for viewing from far away. You can apply a policy such as, pick a maximum tree depth, and if any nodes at that depth have children, remove them and set the node's material to whatever the majority of their materials were. There are a fair number of policies that you can use, each with pros and cons, and a fair number of acceleration structures for them; I won't go into them here but maybe I'll cover it in a later post.
